---
layout: post
title: 2018 JSC Guest Student Programme on Scientific Computing
date: 2018-02-06
updated: 2018-02-06
author: speck_r
description: JSC welcomes applications for the [2018 JSC Guest Student Programme on Scientific Computing](http://www.fz-juelich.de/ias/jsc/gsp)!
---


<!--more-->

In order to give students the opportunity to familiarize themselves
with various aspects of scientific computing as early as possible,
the Jülich Supercomputing Centre is once again organizing a
programme for guest students in the 2018 summer vacation. The
programme is supported by CECAM - Centre Europeen de Calcul Atomique
and IBM. It targets students of science and engineering, computer science and
mathematics who have already completed their first degree but have
not yet finished their master's course.

The students will work together with local scientists on topics of
current interest in research and development. Depending on their
previous experience and interests, they will be involved in various
fields of work, for example:

Computational Science, Applied Mathematics

* Modelling and simulation in physics, chemistry and biophysics
* Techniques of parallel MD simulation
* Modelling, simulation and data analysis in neuroscience
* Parallel computational procedures in quantum chemistry and structural mechanics
* Performance evaluation of parallel algorithms in linear algebra
* Mathematical modelling, statistics and data mining

Computer Architectures, GPU Computing

* GPU-computing
* High-speed data networks & data management
* Programming models and performance portability

High-Performance Computing, Visualization

* Performance analysis and optimization of parallel programs
* Programming of hierarchical parallel computer systems
* Distributed applications, interactive control and visualization
* Virtual reality techniques for visualizing scientific data

The programme will run for ten weeks from 6 August to 12 October 2018.
During this period JSC grants access to its supercomputers, including
the JURECA installation. The participants should be
familiar with the computational branch of their subject. In addition,
practical experience including at least a good knowledge of programming
with C, C++, Python or Fortran on Linux systems should be present.

More information: [http://www.fz-juelich.de/ias/jsc/gsp](http://www.fz-juelich.de/ias/jsc/gsp)

Application deadline: **25 March 2018**
